# trumanshow-gnuradio
Scripts for capturing audio from an FM radio station using an rtl_sdr dongle and the Open Source gnuradio package, and streaming the audio over a network using the Open Source packages lame and vlc.

##Files##
**README.md:** This file

**fm_radio.grc:** The gnuradio flow diagram used to generate fm_radio.py, created in gnuradio-companion.

**fm_radio.py:** The script used to capture audio output from an FM radio station, generated from fm_radio.grc. By default, the script tunes to the frequency 90.1 MHz. A different frequency can be specified at the command line when running the script:

```python fm_radio.py 102.1```

Run the script with the -h option for details:

```python fm_radio.py -h```

**run_vlc.sh:** A one-line shell script used to stream the audio output generated by fm_radio.py over a network. The script takes its input from a local file wmea.mp3 and streams it to a file by the same name at port 8080. See the notes in the Configuration and Use section below for details.

**stream_fm_radio.grc:** A (slightly) different version of the GRC flow diagram. This version is not currently required and should probably be deleted.

##Installation

### Getting the dongle to work
The following two steps are required on Ubuntu 14.04:

1) Add a udev rule for the device

Create the following file: ```/etc/udev/rules.d/20.rtlsdr.rules``` with this rule:
```
SUBSYSTEM=="usb", ATTRS{idVendor}=="0bda", ATTRS{idProduct}=="2838", GROUP="adm", MODE="0666", SYMLINK+="rtl_sdr"
```
Note that the idVendor and idProduct values come from the lsusb listing for the device. For example:
```
$ lsusb # Excerpted
Bus 002 Device 002: ID 0bda:2838 Realtek Semiconductor Corp.
```
Once this file is created, restart udev:
```
sudo /etc/init.d/udev restart
```
2) Blacklist the kernel module ```dvb_usb_rtl28xxu``` 

Add the following line to ```/etc/modprobe.d/blacklist.conf``` and restart the system:
```
blacklist dvb_usb_rtl28xxu
``` 

### Installing GNU Radio 
Install the ```gnuradio``` and ```gr-osmosdr``` packages using APT: 

```$ sudo apt-get install gnuradio gr-osmosdr```

*Note:* In Carl Laufer's *The Hobbyist's Guide to the RTL-SDR*, he suggests a modification to a gnuradio config file for instances running in Linux VMs to prevent "choppy audio." Specifically, in the file ```/usr/gnuradio/conf.d/gr-audio-alsa.conf``` he suggests the following settings in place of the defaults:

```
period_time = 0.10
nperiods = 32
```

### Testing the SDR 
Once the above steps are complete, the system can be tested with the included Python 2 script:

 ```$ python fm_radio.py```

### Installing the lame and vlc packages (for streaming)

To enable streaming of the FM radio output, the following additional software packages must be installed:
* lame (MP3 encoder)
* vlc (all-around awesome FOSS multi-media giant)

```$ sudo apt-get install lame vlc```

## Configuration and Use

First, create a named pipe with a ```.wav``` extension in the same directory where ```fm_radio.py``` lives. You need to do this just once. The named pipe can be reused each time the SDR's audio signal is streamed.

```$ mkfifo wmea.wav```

### Streaming the Radio Signal

1) In the same directory where the SDR's Python script and the named pipe live, start lame, specifying the input and output file names. This command will block until it receives audio input to encode, at which point it will begin displaying summary statistics on its activity, which continues until the audio input ceases. If you run this command in the background, you can run the fm_radio.py script in the same bash session.

```$ lame wmea.wav wmea.mp3 &```

2) Now, in the same bash session, run the fm_radio.py script. Once the script completes initializes and begins generating audio output, the lame encoding summary statistics will display.

```$ python fm_radio.py```

3) In a separate bash session, start streaming the SDR's audio output by running the included one-line shell script named ```run_vlc.sh```:

```$ ./run_vlc.sh``` 

4) Point a browser running on a different host to http://my_ip_address:8080/wbpr.mp3, and enjoy!

*Note:* The audio output produced by the SDR and encoded by ```lame``` is actually stored in ```wmea.mp3``` so that it can be streamed by vlc. Depending on how long streaming continues, this file can grow quite large. Just something to keep in mind.

*Note:* To stop the fm_radio.py script from capturing audio, simply press Ctrl-c in the first bash session described above. As described above, lame will quit on its own when the input to wmea.wav is interrupted. It will however be necessary to kill vlc in the second window.